---
layout: post
title: Designing for Now
author: Merideth Tennant
author-image: mtennant.jpg
summary: The future doesn't matter

---

h1. Designing for Now

The future doesn't matter.
 
Designers and developers think a lot about "the future" — the next iteration of the product, the new version of the UX, the upcoming release. Users don't care about that future. They care about right now; about booking this month's bachelor party, Disney extravaganza, or flight to the in-laws'.
 
At Switchfly we forked our approach to the future. To the left, what's next for the product; and to the right, what we can give users right now. As a result, we launched our first project based not on an elaborate design or development concept but on a clean, efficient (oh and by the way theme-able and extensible) system of components and an organized skeleton.
 
It may not seem ground-breaking, our humble checkout page. But for a company normally focused on the engineered guts of a product, it is. We disassembled and re-created it with user success in mind. We distilled tasks into discrete elements. We organized those elements based on best practices and user testing results. And we mopped up all the extra distraction, confusion, and general mess we could find leaving behind a streamlined experience that gets users from "I've selected this," to "Take my money," with as few roadblocks as possible. 
 
By prioritizing users in this way we've ended up with a product approach that whittles down CSS, HTML, and javascript to a lightweight, nimble set of resources. Where client customization once took days it will now, quite literally, take minutes. Switchfly clients will offer their customers a clearly structured UI framework. Users will interact with an efficient and reliable experience.

As this system improves our users' experiences it also dramatically unburdens our developers and engineers. Suddenly those same engineers and developers are available to think about ... wait for it ... the future.
 
Getting ahead of issues and thinking about how a team will build for them going forward is smart, but so is thinking about how to make users successful in the now. While the future doesn't matter to them, it does to us.